21004-beta staging (#2084)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2022-03-17-graphql-22004-beta.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, Java 18 support, and distributed security caches on Open Liberty 22.0.0.4-beta"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/ryan-storey
author_github: https://github.com/ryan-storey
seo-title: MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, Java 18 support, and distributed security caches on Open Liberty 22.0.0.4-beta - OpenLiberty.io

> seo-description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.4-beta offers GraphQL 2.0, incorporating Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies, as well as Java 18 support with many new exciting features and changes. Also included in this release is distributed security caches, allowing multiple Liberty servers to share caches via a JCache provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.4-beta offers GraphQL 2.0, which incorporates Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies, and Java 18 support, which includes many new exciting features and changes. Also included in this release is distributed security cache support, which allows multiple Liberty servers to share caches via a JCache provider.
```

> blog_description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.4-beta offers GraphQL 2.0, incorporating Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies, as well as Java 18 support with many new exciting features and changes. Also included in this release is distributed security caches, allowing multiple Liberty servers to share caches via a JCache provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blog_description: Open Liberty 22.0.0.4-beta offers GraphQL 2.0, which incorporates Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies, and Java 18 support, which includes many new exciting features and changes. Also included in this release is distributed security cache support, which allows multiple Liberty servers to share caches via a JCache provider.
```

open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
---
= MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0, Java 18 support, and distributed security caches on Open Liberty 22.0.0.4-beta
Ryan Storey <https://github.com/ryan-storey>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> Open Liberty 22.0.0.4-beta offers GraphQL 2.0, incorporating Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies, as well as Java 18 support with many new exciting features and changes. Also included in this release is distributed security caches, allowing multiple Liberty servers to share caches via a JCache provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open Liberty 22.0.0.4-beta offers GraphQL 2.0, which incorporates Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies, and Java 18 support, which includes many new exciting features and changes. Also included in this release is distributed security cache support, which allows multiple Liberty servers to share caches via a JCache provider.
```

> The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 22.0.0.4-beta includes the following beta features (along with all GA features):

Reviewer: it seems like "feature" is being used in two senses here, twice to mean a "Liberty feature",  and twice more to mean general new function/support- ie MP GraphQl is a feature, as are "all GA features", Java 18 is not a feature except in a general sense, and the beta feature for "Distributed Security Caches" is actually distributedSecurityCache-1.0.

Seems odd but maybe Im the only one who would notice :)

Author: I kept going  back and forth between this and 'features and function', but figured no one would notice and this way it was shorter.  I have no issues changing this to 
```suggestion
The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 22.0.0.4-beta includes the following beta features and function (along with all GA features and function):
```

* <<graphql, MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0>>
* <<java18, Java 18 Support>>
* <<security_caches, Distributed Security Caches>>

[#graphql]
== MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0

> MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0 incorporates Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies.  This allows developers to continue using the same functionality provided by MP GraphQL 1.0 but with the updated Jakarta components such as link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/cdi-3.0.html[CDI 3.0], link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/restfulWS-3.0.html[restfulWS] 3.0, link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/jsonb-2.0.html[JSON-B 2.0], etc. Functionally, version 2.0 behaves the same as 1.0 because it uses the same version of the underlying implementation (link:https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-graphql[SmallRye GraphQL]).  If you'd like to learn more about MP GraphQL, see our previous link:{url-prefix}/blog/2020/06/10/microprofile-graphql-open-liberty.html[blog post about MP GraphQL 1.0] and our link:{url-prefix}/blog/2020/08/28/graphql-apis-open-liberty-20009.html[blog post on how to use the GraphiQL UI and third-party Client APIs].

Reviewer: the here, maybe "Jakarta components" should be "Jakarta features" since all the examples are actual OL features

> MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0 incorporates Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies.  This allows developers to continue using the same functionality provided by MP GraphQL 1.0 but with the updated Jakarta components such as link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/cdi-3.0.html[CDI 3.0], link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/restfulWS-3.0.html[restfulWS] 3.0, link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/jsonb-2.0.html[JSON-B 2.0], etc. Functionally, version 2.0 behaves the same as 1.0 because it uses the same version of the underlying implementation (link:https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-graphql[SmallRye GraphQL]).  If you'd like to learn more about MP GraphQL, see our previous link:{url-prefix}/blog/2020/06/10/microprofile-graphql-open-liberty.html[blog post about MP GraphQL 1.0] and our link:{url-prefix}/blog/2020/08/28/graphql-apis-open-liberty-20009.html[blog post on how to use the GraphiQL UI and third-party Client APIs].

Author: ```suggestion
MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0 incorporates Jakarta EE 9.1 dependencies.  This allows developers to continue using the same functionality provided by MP GraphQL 1.0 but with the updated Jakarta features such as link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/cdi-3.0.html[CDI 3.0], link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/restfulWS-3.0.html[restfulWS] 3.0, link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/jsonb-2.0.html[JSON-B 2.0], etc. Functionally, version 2.0 behaves the same as 1.0 because it uses the same version of the underlying implementation (link:https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-graphql[SmallRye GraphQL]).  If you'd like to learn more about MP GraphQL, see our previous link:{url-prefix}/blog/2020/06/10/microprofile-graphql-open-liberty.html[blog post about MP GraphQL 1.0] and our link:{url-prefix}/blog/2020/08/28/graphql-apis-open-liberty-20009.html[blog post on how to use the GraphiQL UI and third-party Client APIs].
```

> To enable the new beta features in your app, add them to your `server.xml`:

Author: ```suggestion
To enable the MicroProfile GraphQL 2.0 beta feature in your app, add it to your `server.xml`:
```

> [source, xml]

Reviewer: what about distributedSecurityCache-1.0 ?

----
<featureManager>
  <feature>mpGraphQL-2.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

[#java18]
== Java 18 Support

Java 18 is coming soon, and with it the following features and changes:

* link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/400[UTF-8 by Default]
* link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/408[Simple Web Server]
* link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/413[Code Snippets in Java API Documentation]
* link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/416[Reimplement Core Reflection with Method Handles]
* link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/417[Vector API (Third Incubator)]
* link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/418[Internet-Address Resolution SPI]
* link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/419[Foreign Function & Memory API (Second Incubator)]
* link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/420[Pattern Matching for switch (Second Preview)]
* link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/421[Deprecate Finalization for Removal]

> 

Author: ````suggestion

[NOTE] 
====
Java Security support has been removed with Java 18+ in Liberty.  If "websphere.java.security" is set in `bootstrapping.properties` will produce the following error in the log:
```
CWWKE0955E: Java Security was requested in bootstrapping.properties while using JDK "18", however this option is no longer valid when using Java 18 and later.
```
====

````

> By taking advantage of trying out the new changes in Java 18 now, you get more time to review your applications, microservices and runtime environments and be a step ahead when it becomes generally available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By trying out Java 18 now, you get more time to review your applications, microservices, and runtime environments and you'll be a step ahead when it becomes generally available.
```

To give this a try today, link:https://jdk.java.net/18/[download] the early access release of Java 18, <<run, install 22.0.0.4-beta>> version of Open Liberty, edit your Liberty server's link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/config/server-configuration-overview.html#server-env[server.env file] to point `JAVA_HOME` to your Java 18 installation and start testing!

For more information on Java 18, please visit the Java 18 link:https://jdk.java.net/18/release-notes[release notes page], link:https://download.java.net/java/early_access/jdk18/docs/api/[API Javadoc page] or link:https://jdk.java.net/18/[download page].
For more information on Open Liberty, please visit our link:{url-prefix}/docs[documentation page].

> If you find anything amiss, <<feedback, let us know>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you find anything amiss, <<feedback,let us know>>.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Now that the POC approved for Java Security to be disabled with Java 18+ (see https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/20289) [and this issue came up after I had created the beta blog issue], we probably should mention that here, just so people know that they need to turn it off should they start using Java 18.  Now, if they use Java 18 and try to turn on Java Security, they'll get a CWWKE0955E error message in the log. (see https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/pull/20291)

[#security_caches]
== Distributed Security Caches

Distributed security cache support has been introduced so that multiple Liberty servers can share caches via a `JCache` provider.
Prior to this feature, the authentication (subject) and logged out cookie caches were restricted to be local and in-memory. Multiple servers were unable to benefit from their peers' caches and each server started with a cold cache.

> As part of this feature both caches can now both be stored in a distributed `JCache`. This can improve performance and failure recovery, reduce the load on backend user registries and improve the security posture of the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of this feature, both caches can be stored in a distributed `JCache` provider. This can improve performance and failure recovery, reduce the load on backend user registries, and improve the security posture of the server.
```

Because the creation of a subject might affect performance, Liberty provides an authentication cache to store a subject after an authentication of a user is successful. The authentication cache now can be distributed using a 3rd party JCache provider. To configure the distributed authentication cache, use the following server.xml configuration:

[source, xml]
----
    <featureManager>
        <feature>appSecurity-3.0</feature>
        <feature>distributedSecurityCache-1.0</feature>
    </featureManager>

    <!-- 
        The 3rd-party JCache provider library that Liberty will use to manage and connect to the cache.
     -->
    <library id="JCacheProviderLib">
        <fileset dir="${shared.resource.dir}" includes="jcacheprovider.jar" />
    </library>

    <!-- 
        Configure the JCache cache instance.
     -->
    <cache id="AuthCache" name="AuthCache">
        <cacheManager uri="uri://someuri">
            <properties prop1="value1" prop2="value2" />

            <cachingProvider libraryRef="JCacheProviderLib" />
        </cacheManager>
    </cache>

    <!-- 
        Configure the authentication cache.
     -->
    <authCache cacheRef="AuthCache" />
----

> If your Liberty environment injects custom principals or credentials into your subject (for instance in a custom `LoginModule` or Trust Association Interceptor (`TAI`)), in order to store them in the distributed authentication cache, they will need to be `Serializable`. Additionally, it is important that the shared library that contains those classes is made available to the caching provider and any other configurations that need access to those classes. If the same shared library is not used for each, `ClassCastExceptions` could be encountered when working with the classes retrieved from the distributed cache.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your Liberty environment injects custom principals or credentials into your subject, such as in a custom `LoginModule` or Trust Association Interceptor (`TAI`), they must be `Serializable` in order to store them in the distributed authentication cache. Additionally, the shared library that contains those classes must be available to the caching provider and any other configurations that need access to those classes. If the same shared library is not used for each, `ClassCastExceptions` might be encountered when working with the classes retrieved from the distributed cache.
```

</library>

<!-- 
    Take notice that the 'libraryRef' attribute has both library references.
 -->
<cache ... >
    <cacheManager ... >
        <cachingProvider libraryRef="JCacheProviderLib,CustomLib" />
    </cacheManager>
</cache>

<!--
    Some sample JAAS custom login module configuration. The custom login module
    in this example would inject custom credentials or principals into the subject.

    Note that the 'libraryRef' in the 'jaasLoginModule' needs to be set to the same
    library referenced from the caching provider.
 -->
<jaasLoginContextEntry id="system.WEB_INBOUND"
    name="system.WEB_INBOUND"
    loginModuleRef="custom, hashtable, userNameAndPassword, certificate, token" />

<jaasLoginModule id="custom"
    className="org.acme.CustomLoginModule"
    controlFlag="REQUIRED" libraryRef="CustomLib" />

<!-- 
    Any applications that will be accessing classes from the Subject also need
    to use the same library reference.
 -->
<application ...>
    <classloader commonLibraryRef="CustomLib" />
</application>
----

A few points to consider when configuring a JCache for use with the authentication cache.

> * The distributed authentication cache is comprised of keys and values of type `Object`

Reviewer: add period after `Object`

> * The distributed authentication cache is comprised of keys and values of type `Object`

Author: ```suggestion
* The distributed authentication cache is comprised of keys and values of type `Object`.
```

> to match the behavior of the local authentication cache, set a least recently used eviction (`LRU`) policy with a maximum entry count of 25000 and an entry TTL of 600 seconds. Note that with distributed caches, partitioning of the cache can lead to an actual capacity below the configured value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To match the behavior of the local authentication cache, set a least recently used eviction (`LRU`) policy with a maximum entry count of 25000 and an entry TTL of 600 seconds. Note that with distributed caches, partitioning of the cache can lead to an actual capacity below the configured value.
```

[source, xml]
----
    <featureManager>
        <feature>appSecurity-3.0</feature>
        <feature>distributedSecurityCache-1.0</feature>
    </featureManager>

    <!-- 
        The 3rd-party JCache provider library that Liberty will use to manage and connect to the cache.
     -->
    <library id="JCacheProviderLib">
        <fileset dir="${shared.resource.dir}" includes="jcacheprovider.jar" />
    </library>

    <!-- 
        Configure the JCache instances.
     -->
    <cache id="LoggedOutCookieCache" name="LoggedOutCookieCache">
        <cacheManager uri="uri://someuri">
            <properties prop1="value1" prop2="value2" />

            <cachingProvider libraryRef="JCacheProviderLib" />
        </cacheManager>
    </cache>

    <!-- 
        Configure the authentication cache to use the JCache. 
     -->
    <webAppSecurity loggedoutCookieCacheRef="LoggedOutCookieCache" />
----

A few points to consider when configuring a JCache cache for use with the logged-out cookie cache.

> * The distributed logged-out cookie cache is comprised of keys and values of type `Object`

Reviewer: add period after Object

> * The distributed logged-out cookie cache is comprised of keys and values of type `Object`

Author: ```suggestion
* The distributed logged-out cookie cache is comprised of keys and values of type `Object`.
```
